# SByC - Friendly Block Expressions

This is part of SByC, a project investigating Specialization By Constraints for Ruby.

## SYNOPSIS

This part of SByC provides a safe, reusable, extensible, mashallable, and non-intrusive (no monkey patching of Ruby core classes) implementation of block expressions. Block expressions are parsed using a generic DSL and converted to a parse tree, which may be analyzed, rewrited, compiled, and so on. The following example illustrates typical usage of SByC::expr.

    # Create a block expression
    expr = SByC::expr{ x > y }      # ::SByC::expr{ (> (? :x), (? :y)) }
    
    # Inspect its parse tree
    expr.ast                        # (> (? :x), (? :y))
    
    # Evaluate the expression
    expr.eval(:x => 5, :y => 2)     # true
    
    # Marshall it...
    Marshall::dump(expr)

## SYNTAX 

The following styles are recognized:

    # Hash-style
    SByC::parse{|t| (t[:x] > 5) & (t[:y] <= 10) }     # => (& (> (? :x), 5), (<= (? :y), 10))

    # Object-style
    SByC::parse{|t| (t.x > 5) & (t.y <= 10)     }     # => (& (> (? :x), 5), (<= (? :z), 10))

    # Context-style
    SByC::parse{ (x > 5) & (y <= 10)            }     # => (& (> (? :x), 5), (<= (? :z), 10))

    # Functional-style
    SByC::parse{ (both (gt x, 5), (lte y, 10))  }     # => (both (gt (? :x), 5), (lte (? :z), 10))

### About the parse tree

The parsing stage returns a functional Abstract Syntax Tree, which can be passed to a next stage (rewriting, evaluation, compilation or whatever). ASTs generated by SByC follow a recursive definition of tree, branch and leaf being both implemented by the AstNode class.

    tree   : branch | leaf
    branch : (name child0, child1, child2, ...)       # see _name_ and _children_ attributes
    leaf   : (_ ruby-object)                          # see _literal_ attribute

where _name_ is a Symbol, representing the name of a ruby operator or method. The following operator names have meaning:

* <code>_</code> denotes literals values. All and only leaf nodes have this operator.
* <code>?</code> is used to denode the reference to a variable. This operator expects one argument, i.e. the variable name, typically (but not necessarily) represented by a symbol literal.
  
For instance:

    SByC::parse{ 12 }.inspect                         # (_ 12)
    SByC::parse{ :x }.inspect                         # (_ :x)
    SByC::parse{ x  }.inspect                         # (? (_ :x))

Leaf node (and therefore, the <code>_</code> operator) only appear when invoking inspect:

    SByC::parse{ x + 12 }.inspect                     # (+ (? (_ :x))), (_ 12))
    SByC::parse{ x + 12 }.to_s                        # (+ (? :x)), 12)

## HIGHER STAGES

    #
    # Re-evaluate the AST with an object semantics in mind: 
    #   the method/operator is sent on its first argument
    #
    expr = SByC::parse{ x + y }                       # => (+ x, y)
    expr.object_eval(:x => 12, :y => 28)              # => 40 (executed as '12.+(28)')

    #
    # Re-evaluate the AST with an functional semantics in mind: 
    #   the method/operator is sent on a global object
    #
    expr = SByC::parse{ (puts x, y) }                 # => (puts x, " ", y)
    expr.functional_eval(Kernel, :x => 12, :y => 28)  # => 12\n28 (executed as Kernel.puts(12, 28))

## TREE REWRITING

Consider the following (functional) example. 

  ast = SByC::parse{ (concat "hello ", (get :who), (times "!", 3)) }

### An evaluation stage

    # Evaluate the code above:
    rewriter = ::SByC::Rewriter.new {|r|
      r.rule(:concat)    {|r, node, *children|   children.collect{|c| r.apply(c)}.join("") }  
      r.rule(:capitalize){|r, node, who|         r.apply(who).capitalize                   }
      r.rule(:times)     {|r, node, who, times|  r.apply(who) * r.apply(times)             }
      r.rule(:get)       {|r, node, what|        scope[r.apply(what)]                      }
      r.rule(:_)         {|r, node|              node.literal                              }
    }
    puts rewriter.rewrite(ast, :who => "SByC")      # => "hello SByC!!!"

### A compilation stage  

    # Generate ruby code for the code above:
    rewriter = ::SByC::Rewriter.new {|r|
      r.rule(:concat)    {|r, node, *children|   children.collect{|c| r.apply(c)}.join(" + ") }  
      r.rule(:capitalize){|r, node, who|         "#{r.apply(who)}.capitalize()"               }
      r.rule(:times)     {|r, node, who, times|  "(#{r.apply(who)} * #{r.apply(times)})"      }
      r.rule(:get)       {|r, node, what|        "scope[#{r.apply(what)}]"                    }
      r.rule(:_)         {|r, node|              node.literal.inspect                         }
    }
    puts rewriter.rewrite(ast)                     # "hello " + scope[:who] + ("!" * 3)

## LIMITATIONS (examples that DO NOT work)

* SByC implicitly assumes that block's code can be interpreted functionally: no concept of variable, no sequence of code, no if/then/else, no loop. Said otherwise: your block code should always "compute a value", without any other (state) side effect. The following will NOT work:

        SByC::parse{ if x then 0 else 1 end }           # 0

* SByC does not uses ruby2ruby or similar libraries to get an AST. It simply executes the block inside a specific DSL. Therefore, ruby expressions on literals will be evaluated at parsing time, according to operator precedence and ordering:
  
        SByC::parse{ x + 12 + 17     }                  # => (+ (+ (? :x), 12), 17)
        SByC::parse{ x + (12 + 17)   }                  # => (+ (? :x), 29)
        SByC::parse{ (x + 12) + 17   }                  # => (+ (+ (? :x), 12), 17)

* For the same reason, only operators that rely on overridable methods are recognized. In particular, the following expressions will NOT work:

        SByC::parse{ x and y }                          # => (? :y)
        SByC::parse{ x && y  }                          # => (? :y)
        SByC::parse{ x or y  }                          # => (? :x)
        SByC::parse{ x || y  }                          # => (? :x)
        SByC::parse{ not(x)  }                          # => false          # Works using Ruby >= 1.9.1
        SByC::parse{ !x      }                          # => false          # Works using Ruby >= 1.9.1

## CREDITS

SByC (c) 2010 by Bernard Lambeau. SByC is distributed under the MIT licence. Please see the {file:LICENCE.md} document for details.