h1. SByC - Investigating Specialization by Constraint

h2. SYNOPSIS

SByC is an investigation about Specialization by Constraint as an alternative to common type systems that we found in (object-oriented) programming languages. The library is written as a collection of Ruby tools described below. Those tools are in fact sub-gems of SByC that can often be used in isolation.

h2. CodeTree

This part of SByC provides a safe, reusable, extensible, mashallable, and non-intrusive (no monkey patching of Ruby core classes) implementation of block expressions. Block expressions are parsed using a generic DSL and converted to a parse tree, which may be analyzed, rewrited, compiled, and so on. The example below illustrates typical usage of CodeTree.

<pre>
code = CodeTree::parse{ x > 10 & y < 20 }   
# => (& (> x, 10), (< y, 20))

# See the evaluation section for details
code.eval{:x => 5, :y => 5}                
# => true

# See the code-generation section for details
code.object_compile('scope', :[])          
# => "scope[:x].>(10) & scope[:y].<(20)"

# CodeTree expressions may be marshaled
Marshal.dump(code)
</pre>

"Learn more about CodeTree":http://blambeau.github.com/sbyc/codetree.html

h2. TypeSystem

This part of SByC implements a TypeSystem abstraction. A type is simply collection of values. A type system is to generate and parse literals and to coerce from String values.

<pre>
TypeSystem::Ruby::type_of(-125)
# => Fixnum

lit = TypeSystem::Ruby::to_literal(-125)
# => "-125"

TypeSystem::Ruby::parse_literal("-125")
# => -125

TypeSystem::Ruby::coerce('-125', Integer)
# => -125
</pre>

"Learn more about TypeSystem":http://blambeau.github.com/sbyc/type_system_.html


h2. INSTALL

bc. gem install sbyc

h2. DOCUMENTATION

* The official documentation can be found on "GitHub pages":http://blambeau.github.com/sbyc/
* The api documentation can be found on "rdoc.info":http://rdoc.info/projects/blambeau/sbyc

h2. CONTRIBUTE

Fork the project on "github":http://github.com/blambeau/sbyc, make a contrib, and send me a pull request

h2. CREDITS

SByC (c) 2010 by Bernard Lambeau. SByC is distributed under the MIT licence. Please see the LICENCE.md document for details.